Judson Fisher

1/25/2024

Cal Poly Humboldt

Department of Forestry, Fire, and Rangeland Management

Regeneration and Fuel Loading with Varying Overstory Retention in Redwood
Stands 10 Years after Transformation to Multiaged Management

# Summary

Interest in the concept of multiaged forestry, or managing stands with
more than one cohort, has existed for centuries but its practice and
popularity have ebbed over time and across locales. This is partly due
to the complexity of multiaged compared to even-aged management and many
questions remain regarding its implementation in unique and varied
forest ecosystems. In response to this need, a manipulative experiment
has been established in the redwood forests of Mendocino County,
California to explore a range of dynamics associated with transition
from even-age to multiaged management in this forest type. This
remeasurement and analysis of that experiment, 10 years after its
initiation will provide valuable information about sprout growth
dynamics, new regeneration, and surface fuel dynamics associated with
different residual overstory densities while documenting the recent
thinning that was conducted to reduce 10-year-old sprout density. These
data will be used to support planning for subsequent harvests and for
prescribed fire and wildfire. It will be useful for guiding the
implementation of multiaged systems in this region and for validating
existing models.

# Background

Ecological forestry which maintains a wide range of ecosystem services
while also supplying timber requires a diverse landscape of highly
varied forest structures (Aplet, 1994; Nolet et al., 2018; O'Hara,
2001). These, in turn, require a variety of silvicultural techniques to
implement and sustain (O'Hara, 1998; Schütz, 2002). The development of
multiaged stand structures has long been an objective of interest for
silviculturists as a key alternative to the conceptually and
logistically simpler, even-aged management (Schütz, 1999). At a basic
level, multiaged silviculture refers to the retention of trees of
distinctively different age classes, growing together within the same
stand. These cohorts may intermingle at the tree level, or exist in
small, even-aged patches within the stand. In the latter case, the
distinction between even- and multiaged management can become blurred
with increasing patch size, but patches are generally much smaller
(often less than 1 ha) than the stands they compose. The pursuit of
multiaged stand structures has often met with mixed results (O'Hara,
2002) and this has led to the investigation of several different systems
for achieving such structures. Research into the efficacy and results
associated with these is ongoing (Beese et al., 2019; Nolet et al.,
2018). One such system that has gained popularity in recent decades is
known as the retention system, which allows for the retention of a range
of tree densities, in dispersed or aggregated spatial patterns and can
be used to maintain, multiaged stands, or convert from even-aged
management (Mitchell & Beese, 2002).

Redwood forests offer a prime opportunity for multiaged management
because redwood regenerate reliably via stump sprouting and are
relatively shade tolerant. Redwood forests have been shown to exhibit
very high leaf area, suggesting their suitability for a multi-layered
forest structure (Berrill & O'Hara, 2007; Van Pelt et al., 2016).
Redwood forests also rank among the most productive forests and redwood
timber is highly valued making their management a keen interest of
private timber producers. Despite redwood\'s fitness for multiaged stand
structures, the successful development of subordinate cohorts depends on
adequate access to light, and lacking this, young sprouts and understory
trees can succumb to reduced vigor and death (Barrett, 1988; Muma et
al., 2022; O'Hara et al., 2007; Webb et al., 2012).

Complicating redwood regeneration and sprout development is the fact
that the competing hardwood species, tanoak, is also shade tolerant and
a vigorous resprouter. Tanoak is a keystone species in terms of wildlife
habitat and First Nation's cultural identities, but from a timber
production standpoint it is often perceived as a nuisance due to a lack
of market development combined with its widespread proliferation
following intensive, repeated conifer harvesting (Bowcutt, 2011). While
redwood grows more quickly than tanoak in multiaged stands, competition
from hardwoods such as tanoak reduce conifer growth and drought
resistance (Berrill et al., 2018; Dagley et al., 2023).

Throughout many of the fire-adapted forests of California, fire
suppression combined with timber harvest has led to crowded stand
conditions, proliferation of more fire-sensitive species, and an
accumulation of surface fuels as well as suppressed young trees (Safford
& Stevens, 2017; Stephens et al., 2009). This situation combined with
climate change has led to increased size and frequency of high-severity
fires (Parks & Abatzoglou, 2020; Westerling, 2016), prompting widespread
interest in fuel treatments and resilient stand structures.

This interest has seen less momentum in the redwood region, likely due
to the perceived safety of these typically moist forests from the threat
of large wildfires. Yet redwood litter is among the most flammable of
conifer litter types (Fonda et al., 1998), seasonal drought leads to
cured fuels, especially during extended breaks in coastal fog (Jacobs et
al., 1985), and numerous physiological adaptations suggest that redwood
is no stranger to fire disturbance (Varner & Jules, 2017). More
concretely, there have been at least six large fires in redwood
ecosystems since 2003, burning at least 466,000 acres including
widespread areas of canopy loss. Scientific consensus places the
pre-colonization fire return interval for redwood forests at 6-25 years
across their range (Lorimer et al., 2009). It is assumed that much of
this activity is attributable to indigenous burning (Varner & Jules,
2017).

There have been several studies that have quantified various fuel strata
in redwood forests. Kittredge (1940) did so for duff and litter in a
redwood plantation. Greenlee (1983) studied fuels at Big Basin State
Park. Stuart (1985) reported on fuels at Humboldt Redwoods State Park.
Finney and Martin (1993a, 1993b) reported on fuels in second-growth
redwood forests (aged \~100 years) at Annadel and Humboldt Redwoods
State Parks. Graham (2009) reported on fuels in old-growth stands across
redwood's range. Glebocki studied fuels with and without thinning
treatments in young (\< 50 years) redwood-Douglas fir stands. No fuel
studies, to my knowledge, have been conducted in redwood forests
actively managed with single-tree selection, but fuel dynamics represent
a potentially important decision variable to consider when managing
forest stands that may be subjected to intentional or unintentional
fire.

# Objectives

The objective of this study is to determine if there are significant
plot level differences from different levels of partial harvests in
redwood forests ten years after treatment. We looked for differences in
three response variables including:

1.  Surface fuels

2.  Redwood and tanoak sprout size

3.  Regeneration

# Methods

## Site description

The 20,000-ha JDSF was established in 1947 after being cut over
(multiple times in some places) starting in 1862. The mission of JDSF is
to remain in timber production for research and demonstration purposes.
The predominant cover type is redwood, tanoak, and Douglas-fir forest
with an elevation range of 20 to 700 m. The climate is Mediterranean,
with cool wet winters and an average annual precipitation of about 1150
mm. The sites that compose our experiment were all redwood dominated
with significant components of tanoak and Douglas fir and were well
stocked with trees 80 to 100 years old. All sites are between 13 and 16
km from the Pacific Ocean at an elevation of 130 to 300 m on
well-drained, sandstone-derived soils. Sites are located on various
aspects of mid to upper-slope positions ([fig_site_map](#fig_site_map)).
Site quality is classified as Site Class II (Lindquist & Palley, 1963;
Webb et al., 2012).

![](media/image1.png){width="6.5in" height="6.5in"}

[]{#fig_site_map .anchor}Fig-site-map. Site location and topography for
our study plots. The red box delineates the area of the topographical
map (background). JDSF = Jackson Demonstration State Forest.

## Study Design

In 2012, four treatments were replicated at four different sites.
Treatments were group selection (GS), high-density dispersed retention
(HD), high-density aggregated retention (HA), and low-density dispersed
retention (LD, [fig-study-design](#fig_study_design)). The GS treatment
is comprised of a circular 1-ha opening in which all trees were removed,
surrounded by a 50-meter buffer of light thinning, in which less than
1/3 of the basal area was removed. The remaining treatments were applied
over 2-ha treatment units and the target post-harvest density was
specified in terms of relative stand density index (SDI) using the
assumed upper limit of SDI for redwood, 2470 stems/ha (Reineke, 1933).
The target residual relative density for the HA and HD treatments was
21% (SDI = 520), and for the LD treatment, it was 13% (SDI = 320). These
densities were chosen to balance the objectives of stand volume
production and individual tree growth, assuming a subsequent, similar
harvest after 20 years (Berrill & O'Hara, 2009).

After harvesting, a square 0.2-ha macro plot was established in the
center of each treatment unit. Approximately 25 redwood and 25 tanoak
sprout clumps were selected for measurement to be well distributed
across the plot. Additionally, sprout clumps were selected evenly for
redwood from clumps with and without residual standing trees.

Ten years after the initial harvest, regeneration plots and fuel
transects were established within the macro plot (@Fig-plot-layout).
Circular regeneration plots with a 4-meter radius were established 10
meters from each macro plot corner, towards the plot center. Terminating
at the center of each of these regeneration plots, 10-meter fuel
transects were established parallel to the macro plot edges. Live fuels
were estimated in 1-meter radius "stations" at the 5- and 9-meter
locations along each transect.

Following year 10 measurements, all plots received a pre-commercial
thinning treatment where the objective was to release merchantable
conifers such as redwood and Douglas-fir from competition. Competing
trees and shrubs were cut, lopped, and scattered within the measurement
plots and fuel transects were re-measured.

![A grid of squares with black lines Description automatically
generated](media/image2.png){width="6.5in" height="4.643055555555556in"}

Fig-st[]{#fig_study_design .anchor}udy-design. Schematic representation
of the experimental design. Black points are fuel transect corners, and
line segments represent individual transects. The outline represents the
macro-plot boundaries within which trees and sprouts were measured.

![A diagram of a diagram Description automatically
generated](media/image3.png){width="6.5in" height="5.560416666666667in"}

[]{#fig_plot_layout .anchor}Fig-plot-layout. A diagram of the fuel
sampling design depicting a 0.2-hectare macro plot, fuels transects,
transect stations, and vegetation sub-plots. Large green circles are
vegetation monitoring plots (which are mostly used for tracking species
composition) and the small orange circles are transect stations where
duff, litter, and live and dead vegetation density were measured.

## Data collection

### Sprout size

Sprout height data were collected during the winter at years 1, 5, and
10 following the initial harvest. Sprout heights at each period were
based on the tallest individual within a clump at the time of
measurement. Sprout heights were measured with a height pole placed at
the same location on the ground at each measurement period. The observer
eliminated parallax by observing from a location upslope, level with the
height of the sprout. Sprout DBH for only redwood was collected in year
10.

### Regeneration

Ten years after the initial harvest, four 4-meter-radius regeneration
plots were established within the macro plot
([fig_plot_layout](#fig_plot_layout)). All regenerating trees (sprouts
and seedlings) within the plot were tallied by species and size class.
This allows for an estimation of sprout and seedling density.

### Fuels

At the same time, fuel transects were established and sampled according
to the Firemon protocol (Lutes et al., 2006), with some adaptations that
were unique to this project. This protocol is very similar to that of
Brown (1974). Transect lengths for 1-, 10-, and 100-hr fuels were 1, 2,
and 4 meters respectively. Coarse woody fuels were measured along the
entire 10-meter transect.

Redwoods like other species of the Cupressaceae, shed branchlets instead
of individual leaves. This leads to difficulty in distinguishing
"litter" from 1-hr fuels. We chose to use an estimated cutoff of about 2
mm for leafy redwood sprays (Graham, 2009), where larger pieces were
considered 1-hr fuel and smaller pieces were considered litter. This may
have led to underestimates of 1-hr fuels, relative to other studies.

Live vegetation percent cover and average height were estimated in
1-meter radius virtual "sampling cylinders" as described in the Firemon
protocol (Lutes et al., 2006). A notable exception is that the sampling
cylinders were allowed to extend to the (average) top height of live
fuels that were continuous within less than a meter of the ground. This
resulted in average live vegetation heights that could sometimes reach
near the height of the sprouts and average heights above 2 meters were
estimated with the help of a clinometer. I made this decision to capture
the vertical continuity of fuels that were continuous with the ground.
Live vegetation percent cover was estimated for four vegetation classes:
live and dead woody fuels, and live and dead herbaceous fuels. The
reason for recording dead "live" vegetation, is that dead branches
attached to live or standing trees are not counted as fine woody debris,
but they are also expected to behave differently than live fuels during
combustion. Average vegetation height was recorded for two classes: the
average combined (live and dead) height of woody and the average
combined height of herbaceous fuel. The average height and percent-cover
estimates are visual estimations and efforts were made to discuss these
frequently to ensure that estimates between observers were consistent.
Percent cover estimates were discrete, rounded to the nearest class in
the set: 0.5, 3, 10, and then all subsequent 10 percent increments up to
100 percent.

The depth of duff and litter was measured at two stations along a
transect, and the percentage of litter was estimated. The location of
the measurement was chosen from within the 1-m-radius sampling cylinder
to be representative of the conditions within the whole cylinder.
Representative conditions were sometimes difficult to identify when
conditions within the cylinder varied greatly.

Fuel bed depth was estimated as the average height of the fine and
coarse woody debris components within the sampling cylinder at each
station. Theoretically, this included litter, but not duff. This
estimate was not described in the Firemon protocol, but it was designed
to be made similarly to the estimates of average vegetation height that
are described there (Lutes et al., 2006).

## Analysis

The analysis was carried out in three stages, one for each of the three
response categories: fuels, sprout size, and regeneration density. All
analyses were conducted using R and attempts were made to document all
data, decisions, and techniques, which are published together with code
and results on a public website. All response variables were analyzed
using multi-level models to account for the inherent nesting structure
of the data, as well as multiple measurements of individuals over time.
Grouping levels were included in the model if their variance estimate
was non-zero. Because the objective was to describe differences between
treatments, treatment was used as the primary independent variable.
Model selection was performed using AIC and BIC and based on parsimony.

### Fuels

Fuel load in Mg ha^-1^ per hectare was estimated for 1-hr, 10-hr,
100-hr, duff and litter, 1,000-hr, and live vegetation fuels
([fig_raw_fuel_hist](#fig_raw_fuel_hist)). Fuel load for 1- through
1,000-hr fuels were calculated using the method in Brown (1974). The
required size-class specific parameters of specific gravity, particle
inclination, and average diameter were derived from the literature by
averaging over applicable sources. Duff and litter load were estimated
using depth-to-load equations from the literature. Live vegetation
loading was estimated roughly as the product of percent cover,
vegetation height, and a scaling factor used in the Firemon protocol
(Lutes et al., 2006).

These fuel loads were then modeled in a multi-level, Bayesian context
using the R package brms (Bürkner, 2017). Using a Bayesian model allowed
for a quantification of the uncertainty regarding our estimates, which
is an important step towards the quantification of uncertainty in fire
behavior predictions to inform critical decision-making. The selection
of priors balanced domain knowledge and the goal of obtaining
data-driven results. A comparison of the prior and the posterior
distributions was used to justify the choice of priors. The model
performance was assessed with posterior predictive checks.

![A graph of different sizes Description automatically generated with
medium confidence](media/image4.png){width="5.825581802274716in"
height="4.161306867891514in"}![A graph of different sizes and shapes
Description automatically generated with medium
confidence](media/image5.png){width="5.755813648293963in"
height="4.111470909886264in"}

[]{#fig_raw_fuel_hist .anchor}Fig-raw-fuel-hist. Histograms of raw
fuel-load transect data.

### Sprout size

Sapling sprout height data ([fig_raw_sprout_hist](#fig_raw_sprout_hist))
was modeled in a frequentist context with multi-level models using the R
package glmmTMB (Brooks et al., 2017). Height data for all three
measurement years were included in the model and measurement year
entered the model as a categorical variable to avoid parametric
assumptions about the relationship between year and height. I tried
models with different fixed and random effects, as well as different
fixed effects to model dispersion. I tried gamma and Gaussian modeling
with log links. Model selection was based on parsimony, model
correctness, and AIC. The selected model residuals were checked using
the R package DHARMa (Hartig, 2022).

![A screenshot of a graph Description automatically
generated](media/image6.png){width="4.883720472440945in"
height="4.883720472440945in"}

[]{#fig_raw_sprout_hist .anchor}Fig-raw-sprout-hist. Raw sprout height
histograms of the data used for developing sprout height models.

### Regeneration

Regeneration will be summarized by species, diameter class, and
treatment. Species will include all species of regeneration that were
recorded. If there appear to be significant trends, statistical tests
may be performed to quantify differences in size class distributions,
e.g., with a chi-squared test, or differences in composition e.g. with a
PERMANOVA test applied to Bray-Curtis dissimilarities (Anderson, 2001,
2017).

# Timeline

My target graduation date is the summer of 2024. This means there are
about 24 weeks from the beginning of February. To leave time for final
writing as well as multiple revisions, with 2-week turnaround times for
advisor reviews, the analysis should be finished in the first 10 weeks.
This will leave about another 10-14 weeks for committee review, editing,
and revision. To accomplish this, writing will need to happen along with
analysis, so that the final writing will mostly consist of crafting the
discussion, editing, and honing my final abstract.

A timeline for analysis steps follows.

Week 1 (02/01 -- 02/06):

-   Revise this proposal

-   Invite final committee member

-   Schedule the first committee meeting

Week 2 and 3:

-   Prepare committee presentation

-   Work on advancement to candidacy paperwork

Weeks 4 and 5 (02/22 -- 03/06):

-   Do regeneration data analysis

-   Review and revise the website and other analyses

-   Have the first committee meeting

Weeks 6 -- 7

-   Revise analysis

-   Write results

Week 8:

-   Write discussion

Weeks 9 and 10 (04/04 -- 04/10):

-   First draft of thesis

-   Send out for review

Weeks: 11, 12, and 13 (04/18 -- 05/08):

-   First draft revisions

-   Analysis revisions

-   Send out the second draft

Week 14 (05/09 -- 05/15):

-   Meet with committee members to discuss revisions

Weeks 15 -- 19:

-   Revisions

Week 20 (06/20 -- 06/26)

-   Defense (Zoom or Hyflex option)

# References

Anderson, M. J. (2001). A new method for non-parametric multivariate
analysis of variance. *Austral Ecology*, *26*(1), 32--46.
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1442-9993.2001.01070.pp.x

Anderson, M. J. (2017). Permutational Multivariate Analysis of Variance
(PERMANOVA). In *Wiley StatsRef: Statistics Reference Online* (pp.
1--15). John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
https://doi.org/10.1002/9781118445112.stat07841

Aplet, G. H. (1994). Beyond Even- vs. Uneven-Aged Management: Toward a
Cohort-Based Silviculture. In *Assessing Forest Ecosystem Health in the
Inland West*. Routledge.

Barrett, M. M. (1988). *A model of third growth coastal redwood sprout
establishment and growth under various levels of overstory removal*
\[Master's Thesis\]. Humboldt State University.

Beese, W. J., Deal, J., Dunsworth, B. G., Mitchell, S. J., & Philpott,
T. J. (2019). Two decades of variable retention in British Columbia: A
review of its implementation and effectiveness for biodiversity
conservation. *Ecological Processes*, *8*(1), 33.
https://doi.org/10.1186/s13717-019-0181-9

Berrill, J.-P., & O'Hara, K. L. (2007). Patterns of leaf area and
growing space efficiency in young even-aged and multiaged coast redwood
stands. *Canadian Journal of Forest Research*, *37*(3), 617--626.
https://doi.org/10.1139/X06-271

Berrill, J.-P., & O'Hara, K. L. (2009). Simulating multiaged coast
redwood stand development: Interactions between regeneration, structure,
and productivity. *Western Journal of Applied Forestry*, *24*(1),
24--32. https://doi.org/10.1093/wjaf/24.1.24

Berrill, J.-P., Schneider, K., Dagley, C. M., & Webb, L. A. (2018).
Understory light predicts stump sprout growth in mixed multiaged stands
in north coastal California. *New Forests*, *49*(6), 815--828.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11056-018-9636-6

Bowcutt, F. (2011). Tanoak target: The rise and fall of herbicide use on
a common native tree. *Environmental History*, *16*(2), 197--225.

Brooks, M. E., Kristensen, K., van Benthem, K. J., Magnusson, A. ni,
Berg, C. W., Nielsen, A., Skaug, H. J., ler, M. M., & Bolker, B. M.
(2017). glmmTMB balances speed and flexibility among packages for
zero-inflate d generalized linear mixed modeling. *The R Journal*,
*9*(2), 378--400. https://doi.org/10.32614/RJ-2017-066

Brown, J. K. (1974). Handbook for inventorying downed woody material.
*Gen. Tech. Rep. INT-16. Ogden, UT: US Department of Agriculture, Forest
Service, Intermountain Forest and Range Experiment Station. 24 p.*,
*16*.

Bürkner, P.-C. (2017). brms: An R package for Bayesian multilevel models
using Stan. *Journal of Statistical Software*, *80*(1), 1--28.
https://doi.org/10.18637/jss.v080.i01

Dagley, C. M., Fisher, J., Teraoka, J., Powell, S., & Berrill, J.-P.
(2023). Heavy crown thinning in redwood/Douglas-fir gave superior forest
restoration outcomes after 10 years. *Canadian Journal of Forest
Research*, *53*(8), 579--590. https://doi.org/10.1139/cjfr-2022-0214

Finney, M. A., & Martin, R. E. (1993a). Fuel loading, bulk density, and
depth of forest floor in coast redwood stands. *Forest Science*,
*39*(3), 617--622.

Finney, M. A., & Martin, R. E. (1993b). Modeling effects of prescribed
fire on young-growth coast redwood trees. *Canadian Journal of Forest
Research*, *23*(6), 1125--1135. https://doi.org/10.1139/x93-143

Fonda, R. W., Belanger, L. A., & Burley, L. L. (1998). Burning
characteristics of western conifer needles. *Northwest Science (USA)*,
*72*(1), 1--9.

Graham, B. D. (2009). *Structure of downed woody and vegetative detritus
in old-growth Sequoia sempervirens forests* \[MS thesis\]. Humboldt
State University.

Greenlee, J. M. (1983). *Vegetation, fire history, and fire potential of
Big Basin Redwoods State Park, California* \[Ph.D., University of
California, Santa Cruz\]. https://www.elibrary.ru/item.asp?id=7397149

Hartig, F. (2022). *DHARMa: Residual diagnostics for hierarchical
(multi-level / mixed) regression models* \[Manual\].
https://CRAN.R-project.org/package=DHARMa

Jacobs, D. F., Cole, D. W., & McBride, J. R. (1985). Fire history and
perpetuation of natural coast redwood ecosystems. *Journal of Forestry*,
*83*(8), 494--497.

Kittredge, J. (1940). A comparison of forest floors from plantations of
the same age and environment. *Journal of Forestry*, *38*(9), 729--731.
https://doi.org/10.1093/jof/38.9.729

Lindquist, J. L., & Palley, M. N. (1963). *Empirical yield tables for
young-growth redwood*. Division of Agricultural Sciences, University of
California. https://catalog.hathitrust.org/Record/010837951

Lorimer, C. G., Porter, D. J., Madej, M. A., Stuart, J. D., Veirs, S.
D., Norman, S. P., O'Hara, K. L., & Libby, W. J. (2009). Presettlement
and modern disturbance regimes in coast redwood forests: Implications
for the conservation of old-growth stands. *Forest Ecology and
Management*, *258*(7), 1038--1054.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.foreco.2009.07.008

Lutes, D. C., Keane, R. E., Caratti, J. F., Key, C. H., Benson, N. C.,
Sutherland, S., & Gangi, L. J. (2006). *FIREMON: Fire effects monitoring
and inventory system* (RMRS-GTR-164; p. RMRS-GTR-164). U.S. Department
of Agriculture, Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Research Station.
https://doi.org/10.2737/RMRS-GTR-164

Mitchell, S. J., & Beese, W. J. (2002). The retention system:
Reconciling variable retention with the principles of silvicultural
systems. *The Forestry Chronicle*, *78*(3), 397--403.
https://doi.org/10.5558/tfc78397-3

Muma, R., Webb, L. A., Zald, H. S. J., Boston, K., Dagley, C. M., &
Berrill, J.-P. (2022). Dynamics of stump sprout regeneration after
transformation to multiaged management in coast redwood forests. *Forest
Ecology and Management*, *515*, 120236.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.foreco.2022.120236

Nolet, P., Kneeshaw, D., Messier, C., & Béland, M. (2018). Comparing the
effects of even- and uneven-aged silviculture on ecological diversity
and processes: A review. *Ecology and Evolution*, *8*(2), 1217--1226.
https://doi.org/10.1002/ece3.3737

O'Hara, K. L. (1998). Silviculture for Structural Diversity: A New Look
at Multiaged Systems. *Journal of Forestry*, *96*(7), 4--10.
https://doi.org/10.1093/jof/96.7.4a

O'Hara, K. L. (2001). The silviculture of transformation---A commentary.
*Forest Ecology and Management*, *151*(1), 81--86.
https://doi.org/10.1016/S0378-1127(00)00698-8

O'Hara, K. L. (2002). The historical development of uneven‐aged
silviculture in North America. *Forestry: An International Journal of
Forest Research*, *75*(4), 339--346.
https://doi.org/10.1093/forestry/75.4.339

O'Hara, K. L., Stancioiu, P. T., & Spencer, M. A. (2007). Understory
stump sprout development under variable canopy density and leaf area in
coast redwood. *Forest Ecology and Management*, *244*(1), 76--85.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.foreco.2007.03.062

Parks, S. A., & Abatzoglou, J. T. (2020). Warmer and drier fire seasons
contribute to increases in area burned at high severity in western US
forests from 1985 to 2017. *Geophysical Research Letters*, *47*(22).
https://doi.org/10.1029/2020GL089858

Reineke, L. H. (1933). Perfection a stand-density index for even-aged
forest. *Journal of Agricultural Research*, *46*, 627--638.

Safford, H. D., & Stevens, J. T. (2017). *Natural range of variation for
yellow pine and mixed-conifer forests in the Sierra Nevada, southern
Cascades, and Modoc and Inyo National Forests, California, USA*
(PSW-GTR-256; p. PSW-GTR-256). U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest
Service, Pacific Southwest Research Station.
https://doi.org/10.2737/PSW-GTR-256

Schütz, J.-P. (1999). Close-to-nature silviculture: Is this concept
compatible with species diversity? *Forestry*, *72*(4), 359--366.

Schütz, J.-P. (2002). Silvicultural tools to develop irregular and
diverse forest structures. *Forestry: An International Journal of Forest
Research*, *75*(4), 329--337. https://doi.org/10.1093/forestry/75.4.329

Stephens, S. L., Moghaddas, J. J., Edminster, C., Fiedler, C. E., Haase,
S., Harrington, M., Keeley, J. E., Knapp, E. E., McIver, J. D., &
Metlen, K. (2009). Fire treatment effects on vegetation structure,
fuels, and potential fire severity in western US forests. *Ecological
Applications*, *19*(2), 305--320.

Stuart, J. (1985). *Redwood fire ecology: Final report submitted to
California Department of Parks and Recreation*. Forestry Department,
Humboldt State University.

Van Pelt, R., Sillett, S. C., Kruse, W. A., Freund, J. A., & Kramer, R.
D. (2016). Emergent crowns and light-use complementarity lead to global
maximum biomass and leaf area in Sequoia sempervirens forests. *Forest
Ecology and Management*, *375*, 279--308.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.foreco.2016.05.018

Varner, J. M., & Jules, E. S. (2017). The enigmatic fire regime of coast
redwood forests and why it matters. *Gen. Tech. Rep. PSW-GTR-258.
Albany, CA: US Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Pacific
Southwest Research Station: 15-18*, *258*, 15--18.

Webb, L. A., Lindquist, J. L., Wahl, E., & Hubb, A. (2012). Whiskey
springs long-term coast redwood density management; final growth,
sprout, and yield results. In R. B. Standiford, T. J. Weller, D. D.
Piirto, & J. D. Stuart (Eds.), *Proceedings of coast redwood forests in
a changing California: A symposium for scientists and managers.* (Vol.
238, pp. 571--581). Pacific Southwest Research Station, Forest Service,
U.S. Department of Agriculture.
https://www.fs.usda.gov/research/treesearch/41828

Westerling, A. L. (2016). Increasing western US forest wildfire
activity: Sensitivity to changes in the timing of spring. *Philosophical
Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences*, *371*(1696),
20150178. https://doi.org/10.1098/rstb.2015.0178

**Alternative titles:**

Redwood Regeneration and Fuel Loading 10 Years after Transformation to
Multiaged Management

Evaluating the Influence of Overstory Retention on Regeneration and Fuel
Load 10 Years After Transformation of Redwood Stands to Multiaged
Management

How Does Variation in Overstory Retention Affect Redwood Regeneration
and Fuel Load 10 Years after Partial Harvest?
